TAPE ONE

Moral and practical discussion of Stephen’s plans for the next year
0:00-5:44
Why Stephen is anxious to help “in the worst places”
5:44-8:00
I’m comfortable being uncomfortable	
8:00-11:13
Stephen on being alone
11:38-12:23
So you want to talk about education a little? (Stephen’s book)
12:51-18:31
Something happened: Evergreen changed my life	
18:31-24:17
Freedom in education
24:17-29:27
Stephen on the learning community
29:27-30:14
Thaumazein (wonder) at Evergreen	
38.16-44:33
How to teach Freshmen
44:33-46:08
Sophrosune, then Stephen gets angry at administrators
46:08-52:50
Against admin
52:50-56:40
And of course, our wonderful faculty
56:40-59:55

TAPE TWO

Facilites? I don’t give a shit. We need to make good thinkers.
0:00-1:55
Liberty as duty
1:55-5:02
Stephen’s personal plague/How to make good students
5:02-10:16
Examples, exemplars, Forms
12:44-14:46
Thucydides teaches Stephen that he’s really very small
14:46-18:31
Engagement, engagement, engagement
18:31-24:40

Moral and practical discussion of Stephen’s plans for the next year
[What ought Stephen do? Can he handle the heat (literally) of working on a farm  in Uganda? Find out on the next episode of Stephen’s Dilemmas! But seriously: Stephen and Rita discuss the moral and practical arguments for and against European travel after graduation, where one ought volunteer after graduation, etc., including whether scrawny little Stephen would keel over doing manual labor in 100+ degree heat.]

Why Stephen is anxious to help “in the worst places”
I’m anxious to be helping, in the worst places. [Rita: Where does that come from?] My education. I’ve got a cultivated sensibility—well, I had a different sensibility that was instilled in me by growing up Christian. I have a lot of self-contempt, which for Kant is actually a great driving force behind duty—it compels people to fulfill their duty. (I’m getting that from [political philosopher Hannah] Arendt, not from Kant, but that’s what she says about Kant). I think Camus puts it best: it doesn’t stem from virtue, but it’s a sort of organic intolerance for suffering, or nausea. And that’s my experience, when I really take a look at power and privilege, and how so many parts of the world are not well. But mostly it comes from my acknowledgement of the human condition, and that I’m part of a human brood, despite the fact that I can’t define the essence of humanity, the essence of man, because that was done away with and I agree with doing away with it, but I still kind of make a wager that…there’s something there, and I need to go help it. [7:34] And my main goal here is this issue of partiality because of distance; I want to go see things that are now at a distance, so I don’t have to just conceptualize it anymore and I can understand that there are people that far away, that I’m causally related to. [Rita: You’ll see it better when you come back…]

I’m comfortable being uncomfortable	
[Rita talks of a Tim O’Brien book where a little boy dissociates from the suffering around him through magic, “a really hard novel to read,” she says, “It promotes the idea that there’s something in all of us that you can’t ignore, can’t not respond, or if you try to, you end up with a life like a sorcerer, playing mind games—or, dulled by commercialism and stuff.”] [9:43] Stephen: Which is mostly what I see in the states… [Rita: Have you been abroad before?] I have not; I used to live in my pick-up truck. [Rita: So your family didn’t get out of the country?] Not really, not in this way. but I’ve gone 34 days alone in my pick-up truck in the States—that’s the longest; I’ve done other trips. I’m comfortable being alone and in uncomfortable instances. Discomfort is how I learn, be it traveling, or be it the Socratic tension of the mind, and if anything, studying philosophy has taught me that discomfort is a good thing. [Rita: You’re not going to feel alone…] There will be people, especially on the farms…

Stephen on being alone
My most profound experiences have been when I’m alone, in the desert or in the forest. Once I departed from the human artifice, threw myself into an environmental or natural setting, it was like my senses were amplified. Most of the trip, I decided not to listen to music [which means a lot, I tell you, for Stephen—he listens to music all the time], and what would happen is that my senses really grew attuned to my surroundings; it was really wonderful, I was hearing things I hadn’t heard. So you want to talk about education a little?

So you want to talk about education a little? (Stephen’s book)
[Stephen clarifies the dates of his summer plans] I’ll finish up my evals, and my summative eval, and I’ll also start working on the book I want to start writing. [Rita: What are you writing?] Fiction. Ideally, I want to write a 130-some-page book this year, a short novel, about a character who—it’s kind of picking up on the tradition of “underground” writing—Dostoyevski, Camus, Ellison, many others. I’d say it began with Camus, although I make an argument in one of my abstracts (I’ve been writing a series of short essays that frame the thematic threads that I’m using), that there’s this really important link with the Greeks. And what Nietzsche actually refers to in Dostoyevski’s work is a ‘marvelous self-derision’ of the phrase “know thyself,” which is the inscription of the [Ancient Greek] Oracle at Delphi… The character is speaking from underground, but I’d like to bring him out of it by the end of the book, which none of these other authors have done. Most underground writing ends at the same point it begins: the vantage point of the storyteller, and I’d like to push him out back into the world. I actually liken that to the ascent of the philosopher in Plato, and how he sees the good and has to come back to the cave. So I’ll draw a comparison between the underground life of these other writers and the realm of Forms of Plato, and do something with that…
But basically the underground for this character is Grub Street—it’s an old street in London that has been re-named Milton Street. (Basically Alexander Pope called it Grub Street, or made fun of it, and it was where all the hack writers hung out.) …So that’s his underground; he’s writing from there. I’m picking up on a lot of the work I’ve been doing in shorter creative pieces—the way he ends up there is that he starts out to find the line dividing beauty and terror, which is a dichotomy that Rilke sets up in Duino Elegies when he says “Every angel is terrifying,” and that “beauty is only the beginning of terror.” And so this individual says, ‘well, I want that to be my aesthetic, I want to find the line dividing this, and then not only can I employ it artistically…’ So that’s why he leaves, that’s why he heads out into the world. So that’s what he sets out to find, and he ends up on Grub Street, disconsolate, failed of his mission in a way. [Rita: So this you’re going to do…?] In first-person narrative. I’ll work on that all year. The one snag I hit over and over again is I need my books to write [but how do I bring my books to Uganda?], because so much of what I’m doing is referencing other things. Richard DeVeer refers to Dostoyevski’s underground writing as…that the point of it is to show the instability and perpetual dialectic of the [isometic consiousness??? unintelligible], so you have this individual, and this system of representations—very private representations—and my point is that he can’t stay there for long and he has to come out eventually, otherwise he’s denying his political identity, and his political obligations, his moral obligations. so I want to break him out at the end in the same way Plato demands of the philosopher—that he has to come back to the cave to teach others how to see in the dark, etc. [Rita: So that’s what you’re doing?] That’s what I’m doing by leaving Evergreen. it’s one of my missions if this works. I don’t think anyone’s ever used underground writing for ethical purposes, and that’s kind of my plan.  [Rita: What you’re describing is a position I wish we could adopt at the college.] Yeah, and this is why. Why isn’t it being adopted at the College?

Something happened: Evergreen changed my life
[short discussion of agreeing on moral education] Evergreen changed my life. It’s not that I learned at Evergreen that personal engagement and linking theory with practice are important—it’s not that I learned that at Evergreen—how could I have gotten anything out of Evergreen unless I believed that? It’s not that I didn’t know that before I got here, but I certainly wasn’t practicing it. I was a stray when I came here, in a lot of ways. My education wouldn’t have meant anything unless I was personally engaged, unless I had some kind of hope that my reflective life had an important bearing on my active life—of course that’s a wager, that those things do go hand-in-hand and will affect each other. A lot of people get really touchy and say, ‘well, have you ever thought it might not affect your active life, or it may erode your active life and the choices you make in your active lif?.’ Well that’s a wager, like any other moral choice, and they all do boil down to wagers. And it’s just as much a wager not to educate yourself, if not a worse wager. [Rita: Now ‘wager’ is an economic term.] Uh-huh. I could say ‘take a chance,’ I could also call it ‘guesswork,’ but I still think that what I didn’t know when I got here was that I had a passion for education. And now I’m committed to making that part of my life’s goal—is participating, or getting people educated. I’ve been struggling with…well, how can I justify the privilege of the artist? …I think the same applies to academics, as it does to art, which is that a lot of academics are doubting whether their work is worthwhile because it doesn’t…it’s not intelligible to the masses, and it’s not speaking for the masses. Of course my hope is that—and I’m not going to say ‘elevate,’ because I don’t believe in the assent of the philosopher so much as in this that Plato talks about in the Republic: it’s about the turning [“Education must turn the soul toward reason and virtue”], positioning yourself to see certain things and turning your back on other things. But eventually you have to turn back if you’re going to lead an active life. And a really successful life should be moving back and forth from contemplation to acting, but it should be easily maneuverable; we should be able to go back and forth in our daily lives.

Freedom in education
[Rita: I want to understand freedom in education…talks of Educating for Freedom]

Stephen on the learning community
[Stephen complains of his classmates’ behavior] Some students would wait until Chuck was in the room to make all their good points—like they were saving up, and I was like, ‘what’s this about? Because you’re here for your peers, too, and you have an obligation because you entered into this class.’ And so that was a way that I could do that without making Chuck take on a more authoritarian role, was get people to remember that we’re all committed to each other, and that’s part of the pact—that’s the unspoken pact you make when you enter an Evergreen classroom.

Thaumazein (wonder) at Evergreen
By the end of this year my suspicions had been corroborated that—not only coming to Evergreen, but making the choice to stay at Evergreen—was the most important and best choice I’ve ever made in my life. There’s a bounty of reasons for that—the list goes on and on—and it’s not that the Greeks had to be it, but they were it for me. Part of that is because they…what they showed me and what I was looking for but I didn’t have a way to do it, was that… for me the genius of the Greeks consists in their unabashed self-examination, and that was a really good model for me. In drama and history and all these things: no hold barred! Let’s look at ourselves! And that really set a tone for my inquiry here. And also their willingness to exploit that inquiry, and expose it for what it is, and take a step back at the examined inquiry itself, like Plato does. And that was a really good starting point for me, and that doesn’t have to be the starting point for everybody, but for me it was. There are two things that I would really like to see emphasized in the curriculum—both of them have Greek terminology—one is thaumazein, I bumped into it before I read Theaetetus, I have three passages that I’ve strung together, one’s in Plato’s Theaetetus, one’s in Aristotle’s Metaphysics, and one’s in Arendt’s Human Condidtion. Plato and Aristotle actually agree that wonder [thaumazein] was the beginning of all philosophy. Arendt explicates this and brings in the nuance—the wonder that everything is the way that it is, the shock and wonder at the miracle of being—I think initially that things are, that they exist, but usually [it’s explained as] the inquiry starts out with more fundamental, trivial matters, then builds up. I think [in real life] it’s usually the other way around—I was stricken by existence itself as an adolescent and I didn’t know what to do with that, so I was despondent for many years. When I came to Evergreen I could direct that puzzlement. …But I remember looking at an old Evergreen pamphlet from the 80s, and it said, ‘A sense of wonder!’ on the cover, like ‘come here and cultivate that!’ and I think that’s really important. And I haven’t seen that in the curriculum or in the attitude that professors are brining to the table so much, but I’d like to see that, especially in freshman programs—have that be the guiding principle. And that’s not the same as early philosophy, that it has to be a luxury… That was very much present at the end of “Ancient Stories/Modern Lives” [Stephen’s first program at TESC, with professors Reece, Taylor, and Koppelman]. That’s, I think, why that program was so successful; people were wondering, not just thinking, because the thinking generally comes after the wondering, after that initial ‘whoa!’ With Thucydides [History of the Peloponnesian War], people were so blown away, and then they started thinking harder about that. But it was that initial discomfort that really got them going.

How to teach Freshmen
I think if the faculty had that on their mind—I understand that most faculty don’t want to teach freshmen, and even those that do want to teach freshmen can’t find partners to teach them with—no one wants to do it—and I think that (I can say this about my clan), as freshmen we really had the opportunity to see the value of this wonder, and that the following-up of that wonder was serious study. And if that doesn’t happen when people are freshmen here, I don’t know if it’s ever going to happen, because people are going to be facing… I think a lot of them will decide they’re here to amass knowledge. If they don’t understand the Socratic tension of mind their first year here, most of them are going to be like, ‘okay, well I’m here to know things, or to amass knowledge.’ And I think that’s a mistake when it comes to undergraduate education. I think it’s far more important that people learn how to think, and get models for thinking, and not only models for thinking but models for living. Finding an example…

Sophrosune, then Stephen gets angry at administrators
[Rita: Curricular Visions didn’t look at what it means to be a Liberal Arts College or moral education…] I’d like to see that in the curriculum. I don’t think anyone’s going to know what to do with this so-called knowledge they’re acquiring unless they take some other steps. I think part of that is knowing how to think critically, etc. Another thing: there’s a Greek virtue that’s nearly intranslatable to English, that’s virtually missing in American culture, and that’s sophrosune—temperance, moderation, that’s intimately tied with self-knowledge, self-control, and self-discipline. And we don’t have a nuance or a term that’s equivalent to that Greek term. …We don’t have that completely, and that’s the problem, particularly in an instiution of higher education conflicted with itself—there’s the good citizen model, the factory/product model, there’s the business/consumer model, all of which cohabit Evergreen. And of course the factory/product model is making people eligible to participate in the market. it’s not that any one of those models is horrible, but the fact that they coexist in one institution is unhealthy. We have administrators looking at things through these two models, and then of course there’s the student-student model, or the student-faculty model, which is very different from the business/customer model. And it’s really unhealthy! These tensions between all these different models.

I got really angry at this one lunch we had with the Board of Trustees, where David Lamb referred to us as customers and products—he actually said, “we’re so darn proud of our products”! And I flipped out—and I was sitting with Art and Les, and I was like, “no!” It’s not that that’s inappropriate, but this needs to be first and foremost a public institution where there’s a relationship between the state and its citizens. And these tensions are really unhealthy, and the friction that’s between these models is changing the institution in negative ways. So we argued about it and Carolyn told me to shut up…because I was shouting loud enough for everyone to hear me. We were about to introduce ourselves so I stood up and said, “Hi, I’m Stephen Engel; I’ve been a customer here since 2003…” [Also in that same speech he identified himself as “product number A001…”] Also at the President’s Recognition Dinner, I got one of Les’s buddies from U.S. Bank—some C.E.O.—Charlie McCann and I were sitting across the table from one another, he saw that I was upset, I saw that he was upset—I almost walked out, or started crying, because I thought it was one of the worst things… I’ve never heard Les speak astutely about education or anything that we were doing at this college—or Art Costantino for that matter (sure, he’s in charge of student affairs, but those two people should understand what we’re supposed to stand for). I do think they understand it, actually, but I don’t think they incorporate it into what they’re doing. [Stephen gets mad about Art and Les…]

Against Admin
[Rita: An institution needs to have some kind of direction in order to make progress, and we don’t have that …]

And of course, ouR wonderful faculty
It needs to be the faculty [who have a vision and make it happen]. I need to see the faculty step up. And they have a lot of power with that Faculty Handbook. …If the faculty have enough autonomy, I don’t care who’s running the administration. But there are things that cannot change—and the student/teacher ratio is already too high, and that should be part of bargaining. And we’re never going to achieve the things we set out to achieve with that ratio!—not with this type of work. If we wanted to go to a university, or something else, then I’d say, ‘sure, increase the ratio.’ But if we want to stay interdisciplinary, or stay liberal arts in the way we’ve been and actually achieve the democratic ideals we’ve set for ourselves, the ratio cannot change. Otherwise it’s not going to happen; students are going to continually fall through the cracks… [Rita: If we did something like an MLA (Master’s in Liberal Arts), we could distinguish ourselves as preparation for teaching, and we could have graduates working with programs…] Setting really good examples—and we could have them teaching Freshmen Core. [Rita: We could have a graduate student with every program as part of their academic study…] Of course…I don’t want a Master’s program to be what helps this college. [Rita: No, and it can’t solve this problem.] The undergraduate program is what distinguishes this college. [unintelligible for a second…] One way that could be done is lower the ratio and make sure _______ is happening, another is to really strengthen Freshman offerings…even have programs you teach over again, I know that used to happen. One program I would really want to teach if I were to come back here would be called “Responsibility,” and we would read moral philosophy—we’d do all sort of things.

Facilities? I don’t give a shit. We need to make good thinkers.
Maybe it’s because I’m not a science student and I’m not a computer science student, but when it comes to facilities, facilities do not draw students to this school. I don’t care about up-to-date facilities; we could do this in a mud hut for all I care. What’s going to distinguish our undergrad programs is not a broad offering, but the tone we set, the quality of our graduates as people not just thinkers—the impact they make in the world, and that’s what we need to be advertising. The problem of course is that so many students have left here wanting to be _____, because they studied political economy or they studied systemic oppression—basically what I want to distinguish in the undergraduate program is turning into a movement, a moral movement, and political movement. It’s difficult, but it’s how we view education that’s going to frame that. That’s a dream, right? But we still need to be spending lots of time—I mean, facilities? I don’t give a shit. Up-to-date technology? I don’t give a shit. So long as we’re being innovative in the way we thing and teach, that’s all that matters to me.

Liberty as duty
[Rita: What would be the kinds of experiences or the nature of the experience you have as a student that would contribute to this as a moral movement?] The same thing that happened to me, I guess—I can’t conceive of myself now individualistically. There are conservatives here. Most students that I run into—the reason they don’t know to be liberal is that the education hasn’t worked on them yet. I’m sorry to say that, but I don’t think they’ve learned enough yet. I need to think about this more, but what I’m saying is… [Rita: I’m sincere about this because we define ourselves as an interdisciplinary college and it doesn’t seem very compelling anymore.] People need to understand that duty…Camus put this very well: that freedom is not a right, it’s a duty—sorry, liberty is not a right, it’s a duty. In many ways that’s what I’ve learned here: to look at education as an obligatory… [Rita: What does that mean?] It’s not something that can be proffered to you by a government, for instance. It’s not something that could be… basically that you have to be responsible. The onus is to live a responsible life, whereas liberty as a right will give rise to acquisitiveness and consumer culture. Liberty as a duty will give rise to people who are ethically-minded and people who are politically-minded, and are invested in the future of others and not only themselves. So I see the difference in the consequences of these two concepts, and that’s how I can explain it best. If you conceptualize liberty as a right, I think that you get people that are self-absorbed; if you look at it as a duty, that acknowledges the web of how people are related.

Stephen’s personal plague/How to make good students
[Rita: Is there one story you could tell about yourself that’s Evergreen? That will or encouragement toward a sense of duty?] That’s what’s—I don’t know what happened, it’s kind of magical. Part of it has to do with Camus’ The Plague, and part of it has to do with the fact that I came here as a Christian, deconstructed all of my values, had a virtual nervous breakdown, and started building again—a different set of values. There are vestiges of my Christian faith that have stayed…struggling with nihilistic tendencies, you know, rights [as in ‘right v wrong’]  aren’t real, so why should I care?—basically being stupidly intelligent, where you’re abusing what you have and playing games, seeing what you can get away with theoretically.
And something drew me back. Part of it was The Plague; part of it was an aesthetic disgust with that type of individual that I saw myself becoming, which is—at first I was like, ‘oh, [Dostoyevski’s] Ivan Karamazov is cool.’ And then I was like, ‘wait, he’s got no dignity whatsoever. I can say that I was very puzzled by the problem of life in general and all of its concomitant problems when I got here, and at this point, I can leave here I can say I’m far more level-headed when it comes to those problems, but when it comes to how I view myself as a person with agency—that’s what we were originally asking about—that sensibility is a culmination of living with that attention of thought and really trying to understand texts. I mean really sitting down and reading books and suspending judgment. That, and also, having Sara Huntington’s writing class “Style”—I read Orwell’s “Why I Write” and “Politics in the English Language” while I was taking Sara’s class. The undertones of the entire curriculum she’s working with is ‘how can we be more socially- and politically-responsible writers?’ And how is it that so much of our language covers up agency?—with nominalizations, with passive speech, with references that don’t explicitly mention agents. So after reading The Plague, that really affected me. And my whole concern with language that I got from philosophy of mind. But there’s something I really can’t account for, and I think that’s the most magical part of my education, is that I have this sense of duty, but any time I try to take it up with an epistemelogical or philosophical lens, I can’t give you an answer. And I think part of the magic lies in the very activity of study—and also being forced to conceive of myself as an agent in the world, over and over again under different lenses. Seeing how many ways I could cast that. But it all boils down to this turning inwards and this self-examination—the personal engagement with the world. What I said at the beginning: how could any of this have been anything if I wasn’t planning on linking theory with practice, or if I wasn’t personally engaged?

[Rita: Where did that message come from?] It came from me getting here and saying, ‘well, I don’t know what else I’m going to do,’ but also having my tight-knit group, and we were all committed together, and we were all pushing each other on—never really saying why, but meta-study was really important. At the end of my first quarter here, we spent two days doing fishbowl conversations in “Ancient Stories/Modern Lives” and reflecting on what the books had done to us. So I really can’t say that I didn’t bring it with me, but I also can’t say I didn’t get it here. This is what serious education is all about; it’s about that personal engagement, and in the same way that understanding shouldn’t be a passive thing, it should be an active thing. And I don’t know where it came from, I think it came from a culmination of experiences. [11:37] …There’s some people that I sit around with at Evergreen and think, how could you not care about this?

Examples, exemplars, Forms
[Rita: What kinds of experiences would we all have to have at the college so we would actually care?] Part of it really is the examples that Andrew [Reece] and Nancy [Taylor] and Nancy [Koppelman] set [in Stephen’s first program]. They got us to trust them that there was payoff in reading this stuff. [Rita: What was that example? What would they do with each other?] Showing us in seminar, engaging with their texts, engaging in the activities and being serious about it. Arendt says examples are the signposts of morality; they point the direction. We create our examples or our models—and this is very Platonic in a way, except with Kant you can create examples, exemplars, that are different from [Plato’s] Forms, especially because we create them. Simply put: examples are the signposts of morality. Those professors taught us to read our personal lives into texts, part of that was because our program was about reading books. There was a lot of meta-study going on in that program, and I think that’s really important for freshmen; if they get here and they think they’re here to acquire knowledge, that’s a problem. That comes later. When they get here they need to understand why they’re doing it, because they were never taught that in high school.

Thucydides teaches Stephen that he’s really very small
I had time between high school and college to think about that. I didn’t want to go to college; I wanted to write. I realized at some point that my writing sucked, or that I was working too much to have time to write. I was tired. I was like, ‘why? I should go to college; I’ll have time to write.’ I went to college and I fell in love with it. Thucydides was a real turning-point for me. My first quarter was great, but Nancy Taylor made me stay in the program—I tried to leave but Nancy was like, ‘you don’t have to write a research paper—do it for twelve credits so you have time to write outside of class. I don’t want to teach this program without you.’ I said I didn’t know, and she said, ‘call me in the next two days and tell me that you’re staying in the program. I know you’re staying in this program.’ So I stayed for that quarter—I loved the program—and I read Thucydides, and I was initiated into this… I was in totally over my head; everyone was. I was up until 5 am each night reading Thucydides so I could make a good contribution in class the next day because I was so profoundly affected by this book and I couldn’t turn away because the problems in it were so immense and so universal that I was like, ‘god damn. This is important!’ And in that sense I was like: there is an important relationship between active and reflective lives. [Rita: Because of the importance of the problems?] Yup. Finally I could… I had been so self-absorbed in my own suffering; I was so isolated as an adolescent, so closed off, I had no sense of community, then I read these books. So often in Ancient Stories/Modern Lives we talked about the universality of story and themes that happen over and over again and I realized there was something much bigger than myself going on, bigger than my own suffering. There was something to worry about: humanity, and what was going on there. The only reason I had turned to texts before that—ever since my inner turmoil at 14—was conducted on my own things; it was all a very selfish study. Finally I couldn’t look at books that way anymore; I couldn’t look at stories that way anymore, and I was like, ‘oh, there’s something much bigger than myself going on here.’

Engagement, engagement, engagement
[Rita: Do you remember what that engagement looked like, when you talked about that your faculty were “engaging.”] It wasn’t authoritarian, oddly enough. It was them doing their thing and showing zeal for what we were doing, in front of the students, and also really looking at themselves as learners. Nancy Koppelman I don’t think had ever read Thucydides before that. Nancy Taylor had read it once. Everyone in the program, including Andrew, said this book is so difficult, none of us will be able to understand this book fully. So the professors and the students were in the same boat: we were all learners together. And that’s something Evergreen believes in. But we were forced by the enormity of the text to really come together, and they were leading examples because they were exhausted, too. But they also were showing us the light at the end—not because they knew the end of the book—but because they were all people who respect it, because of the sensitivities they had brought to the table. If students don’t respect their faculty, if there’s not a model in the classroom, if there’s not an example in the classroom, then I don’t think students are going to get anything out of it. That could be faculty that are humble about what they’re doing, but if somebody’s not willing to take an exemplar role, then most programs will fail. And it might be that the authors we’re  reading—those might be the examples. But if students don’t have something to model their lives after, every class is sunk. It might not be the same for science, but not really…

[Rita: It sounds like you had a group of faculty—and then it affected the whole program—where they could trust everybody involved—or they grew to that—but they could experience that vulnerability…]

I think freshmen are really important… I’ve run into so many sophomores, juniors, and seniors who don’t understand things I think they should have, about studying. [Rita: We have so many transfer students…] Yeah, but most of them aren’t. [Rita: There’s great variability in experiences here.] I guess this is why hiring is so important. I don’t have answers, but I know what I think we need to emphasize more in freshman courses. Once we learned from our examples—Nancy, Nancy, and Andrew—we all went into other programs and became examples to other students and knew how to do that. [Rita: And then made a difference in those classrooms with those classmates…] I think so. 

